Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger and today
we're going to introduce a very important
notion of the separation between two lines this
is a notion called a spread and it is logically
much clearer than the corresponding notion
of angle which is currently taught it also
has many other advantages it's computationally
much simpler the resulting theory of geometry is
much more elegant and students can work with
it even from primary school level let's look
at the main idea here are two lines and here's
the classical way of defining an angle between
them when draws a circle centered at the point of
intersection and then defines the angle theta to
be the ratio between this circular distance s and
this linear distance of D that already presupposes
that you have a notion of measurement of curves
which strictly speaking requires calculus many
standard angles become in this formulation which
is called the Radian measure rather complicated so
for example perpendicular lines otherwise known as
90 degrees in the engineering literature becomes
in this system a rather complicated number whose
decimal expansion begins like this but going on
is much more complicated to describe because of
the complexity of forcing the linear structure
on the circle whenever you make computations in
this system you are forced to introduce a lot
of complicated circular functions like sine cosine
tangent cosecant all their inverse functions - and
most book treatments of the subject concentrate
on the properties of these functions often to
the exclusion of actually dealing with a rich
family of trigonometric problems our approach
is to radically rethink the situation and we are
motivated by the following definition the idea
is to take two lines and drop a perpendicular from
one point to the other then we have a little right
triangle and there are three quadrants involved
and we're going to ultimately define the spread
between these two lines so it turns out to be a
ratio of quadrants --is P over Q in this way 90
degrees turns out to be the spread of 160 degrees
corresponds to a spread of 3/4 45 degrees to a
spread of 1/2 and 30 degrees to a spread of 1/4
all of the trigonometric laws become much simpler
when expressed in this framework however this
is not the official definition we're going to
give because it's not purely algebraic which is
the framework that we've been working in so far
so let's have a look at the real definitions of
these two quantities if we want to define angles
precisely not involving pictures we have to use
the following formula so here we have two lines
l1 and l2 written in terms of their equations
the formula for the angle is cos inverse of this
expression and I note that there's some square
roots at the bottom here which already takes us
outside of the rational number system and this
Coast inverse function is given by an infinite
power series and there's a regular pattern to
it but it D is a little bit complicated and
it's hard to compute you can only ever compute
it approximately because you need to truncate at
some point to get an actual answer an additional
complication is that sometimes you have to add or
subtract PI to this depending on what quadrant
you're in and of course you need to understand
what PI is PI is this special number 3.1415926
blah-blah-blah which goes on indefinitely again
it already contains an infinite amount of
complexity so you can see that even though
this formula is hidden in most trigonometric
Adama tree texts the actual proper definition
of an angle is very complicated and so it's no
surprise that almost all theories that are built
on the notion of angle involving geometry are
unnecessarily complicated let's have a look at
the notion of spread and just why it is so much
simpler so how do we calculate a spread between
two lines suppose the lines are l1 and l2 with
these coefficients then the spread between them
is defined to be 1 minus this quantity here this
is a lot like the quantity that was appearing in
the coast inverse function on the previous slide
except that we haven't taken the square root now
it's a lovely fact that when you take one minus
this you can rewrite that compactly in this
preferred notation so in a1 b2 minus a2 b1 all
squared divided by a 1 squared plus b1 squared
times a 2 squared plus b2 squared and the first
thing that we observe is that if the numbers a1
b1 c1 a2 b2 c2 are rational numbers then this
is also a rational number so we do not need to
go outside the rational numbers system to measure
the separation between two lines in that system
this is an enormous advantage to the notion of an
angle let's do an example here are two lines this
would be the equation 3x plus 2y plus 1 equals
0 this would be X minus 4y plus 2 equals 0 the
formula tells us this times this minus this times
this all squared divided by this squared plus this
squared times this squared plus this squared and
we get 196 over 221 it's hard to overestimate how
much simpler this notion makes trigonometry in our
next video I'm going to show you just how simple
the laws of trigonometry become when expressed in
terms of quadrants and spread instead of distance
and Aang I hope you're gonna join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger, thanks for listening